Package in Java
A package is a folder/group that organizes related classes and interfaces.

Why packages are used?

To avoid name conflicts

To organize code

To provide access control

To make code easy to manage

Types of packages:

Built-in packages → provided by Java

Examples: java.util, java.io, java.lang

User-defined packages → created by programmer

package mypack;

Shortest definition:
Package = a collection of related classes


Package

A collection/folder of related classes and interfaces.

Used for organization and avoid name conflicts.

Example: java.util

Class

A blueprint used to create objects.

Contains variables and methods.

Example:

class Student { }

Very Short Difference:

Package = container

Class = content inside the contai


Q1. What is Java?

A high-level, object-oriented, platform-independent programming language.

Q2. Why is Java platform-independent?

Because Java uses bytecode which runs on the JVM, not directly on OS.

Q3. What is bytecode in Java?

Intermediate code generated by the compiler for JVM.

Q4. Why does Java use bytecode instead of machine code?

To make Java portable and platform independent.

Q5. What is a JVM and what does it do?

Java Virtual Machine — runs bytecode, manages memory, ensures security.

Q6. Difference between JDK, JRE, JVM?

JDK = JRE + compiler (development)

JRE = JVM + libraries (run programs)

JVM = Executes bytecode

Q7. What is WORA?

Write Once, Run Anywhere → Java programs run on any platform with JVM.

Q8. Why is Java more secure than C/C++?

No pointers, automatic memory management, bytecode verification, sandboxing.

Q9. Role of JIT compiler?

Converts bytecode to machine code at runtime for faster execution.

Q10. What is a Java compiler and what does it produce?

javac — converts .java file to bytecode (.class).

Q11. Tokens in Java? Examples?

Smallest elements of code.
Examples: keywords, identifiers, literals, operators, separators.

Q12. What are identifiers? Rules?

Names for variables, methods, classes.
Rules: no keywords, no spaces, can’t start with number, case-sensitive.

Q13. Difference between keyword and identifier?

Keyword = reserved word

Identifier = user-defined name

Q14. Why must main() method be static?

So JVM can call it without creating an object.

Q15. Structure of a basic Java program?

Class → main() method → statements.

Q16. Primitive data types?

byte, short, int, long, float, double, char, boolean.

Q17. Non-primitive data types?

String, arrays, class, objects, interfaces.

Q18. Why is String not a primitive?

Because it is a class, not a basic data type.

Q19. What is a variable?

A name that stores data value.

Q24. What are operators? Main types?

Symbols that perform operations.
Types: arithmetic, relational, logical, assignment, bitwise.

Q26. What is short-circuiting?

In && and ||, second condition is skipped if result is already known.

Q27. What is type casting?

Converting one data type to another.

Q28. Widening type casting?

Small → Big (automatic).

Q29. Narrowing type casting?

Big → Small (manual cast needed).

Q30. Why is narrowing not automatic?

Because it may lose data.

Q31. What happens if you cast double to int?

Decimal part is removed.

Q33. Input using Scanner?
Scanner sc = new Scanner(System.in);

Q34. nextInt() vs nextLine()?

nextInt() → reads only number

nextLine() → reads entire line including spaces

Q35. Purpose of Math class?

Performs mathematical operations.

Q36. Name 3 Math methods.

Math.sqrt(), Math.pow(), Math.random().

Q37. Built-in packages?

java.lang, java.util, java.io, java.net, java.awt.

Q38. User-defined packages?

Packages created by the user.

Q39. Access modifiers?

public, private, protected, default.

Q40. Explain them (short).

public → everywhere

private → same class

protected → same package + subclass

default → same package

Q41. Input → Process → Output cycle?

Take input → process logic → show output.

Q42. What happens when you compile a Java program?

.java → bytecode (.class).

Q43. What happens when you run a Java program?

JVM loads class → verifies → executes bytecode → output.

Q44. Use of System.out.println()?

Prints output to screen.

Q45. Why do we need a main method?

Execution of the program starts here.

Q46. Can a Java program run without a main method?

No (except static blocks in old versions).